Documentation for Third-Party Core Integration (#615)
ucb-bar/chipyard: docs/Customization/Custom-Core.rst

      def vLen: Int = 0
      def sLen: Int = 0
      def eLen(xLen: Int, fLen: Int): Int = xLen max fLen
      def vMemDataBits: Int = 0
    }

    case class FPUParams(
      minFLen: Int = 32,          // Minimum floating point length (no need to change) 
      fLen: Int = 64,             // Maximum floating point length, use 32 if only single precision is supported
      divSqrt: Boolean = true,    // Div/Sqrt operation supported
      sfmaLatency: Int = 3,       // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (single precision)
      dfmaLatency: Int = 4        // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (double precision)
    )

Most of the fields here are originally designed for the Rocket core and thus contain some implementation-specific details, but 
many of them are general enough to be useful for other cores. It is strongly recommended to use these fields instead
of creating your own custom fields when applicable. 

You will also need a ``CanAttachTile`` class to add the tile config into the config system, with the following format:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala

>     :lines: 61-67

Reviewer: Instead of line numbers, we recommend using encoded comments lines as indicators for segment start and end (since line numbers will likely change as the code is fixed during Rocket bumps)

Author: OK, it seems like I cannot excluded a part of the class body when I wrapped the marker comments around a class...it's a little ugly now (with comment in front of the right bracket at the end of a class), if you don't mind.

Reviewer: I don't understand why

.. code-block:: scala

    protected def makeMasterBoundaryBuffers(implicit p: Parameters): TLBuffer
    protected def makeSlaveBoundaryBuffers(implicit p: Parameters): TLBuffer

You can find more information on ``TLBuffer`` in :ref:`diplomatic_widgets`.

Connect Interrupt
-----------------

Chipyard allows a tile to either receive interrupts from other devices or initiate interrupts to notify other cores/devices. 
In the tile that inherited ``SinksExternalInterrupts``, one can create a ``TileInterrupts`` object (a Chisel bundle) and 
call ``decodeCoreInterrupts`` with the object as the argument. You can then read the interrupt bits from the object.
The definition of ``TileInterrupts`` is 

.. code-block:: scala

    class TileInterrupts(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
      val debug = Bool() // debug interrupt
      val mtip = Bool() // Machine level timer interrupt
      val msip = Bool() // Machine level software interrupt
      val meip = Bool() // Machine level external interrupt 
      val seip = usingSupervisor.option(Bool()) // Valid only if supervisor mode is supported
      val lip = Vec(coreParams.nLocalInterrupts, Bool())  // Local interrupts
    }

> This function should be in the implementation class since it involves hardware generation. 

Reviewer: This needs some context

Author: I moved it to the paragraph above and it should be good now.

Also, the tile can also notify other cores or devices for some events by calling following functions in ``SourcesExternalNotifications``
from the implementation class:

.. code-block:: scala

    def reportHalt(could_halt: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when there is an unrecoverable hardware error (halt the machine)
    def reportHalt(errors: Seq[CanHaveErrors]) // Varient for standard error bundle (used only by cache when there's an ECC error)
    reportCease(could_cease: Option[Bool], quiescenceCycles: Int = 8) // Triggered when the core stop retiring instructions (like clock gating)
    reportWFI(could_wfi: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when a WFI instruction is executed

Create Implementation Class
---------------------------

> The implementation class for your core is of the following form:

Reviewer: Is this where you would usually have the Blackbox? 
What is the role of the implementation class, and why is it different than the Tile class?
(I know the answers, but I think they should be written here)

Author: I just put some extra comments there in addition to what you asked for. You may want to have a look.

Reviewer: that's better

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :lines: 151-159

Create Config Fragments to Integrate the Core
---------------------------------------------

To use your core in a Chipyard config, you would need a config fragment that would create a ``TileParams`` object of your core in
the current config. An example of such config will be like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :lines: 162-179

Chipyard looks up the tile parameters in the field ``TilesLocated(InSubsystem)``, whose type is a list of ``InstantiableTileParams``.
This config fragment simply appends new tile parameters to the end of this list. 

Now you have finished all the steps to prepare your cores for Chipyard! To generate the custom core, simply follow the instructions
in :ref:`custom_chisel` to add your project to the build system, then create a config by following the steps in :ref:`hetero_socs_`.
You can now run any desired workflow for the new config just as you do for the built-in cores. 

> If you would like to see how an actual core are integrated into Chipyard, ``generators/ariane/src/main/scala/ArianeTile.scala`` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to see an example of a complete third-party Verilog core integrated into Chipyard, ``generators/ariane/src/main/scala/ArianeTile.scala`` 
```

Author: Done.

> provides a concrete example of integrating a third party Verilog core Ariane. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provides a concrete example of the Ariane core. Note that this particular example includes additional nuances with respect to the interaction of the AXI interface with the memory coherency system. 
```

Author: Done.

.. _custom_core:

Adding a custom core
====================

> You may want to integrate a custom RISC-V core into the Chipyard framework. This documentation page provides a step-to-step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may want to integrate a custom RISC-V core into the Chipyard framework. This documentation page provides step-by-step
```

> instruction on how to achieve this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instructions on how to achieve this.
```

.. note:: 

    RoCC is currently not supported by cores other than Rocket and BOOM. Please use Rocket or BOOM as the RoCC base core if you need to use RoCC.

Wrap Verilog Module with Blackbox (Optional)
--------------------------------------------

Since Chipyard uses Scala and Chisel, if the top module of your core is not in Chisel, you will first need to create a Verilog
blackbox for it so that it can be processed by Chipyard. See :ref:`incorporating-verilog-blocks` for instructions.

Create Parameter Case Classes
-----------------------------

Chipyard will generate a core for every ``InstantiableTileParams`` object it discovered in the ``TilesLocated(InSubsystem)`` key.
This object is derived from``TileParams``, a trait containing the information needed to create a tile. All cores must have
their own implementation of ``InstantiableTileParams``, as well as ``CoreParams`` which is passed as a field in ``TileParams``.

``TileParams`` holds the parameters for the tile, which are the same for every generated core, while ``CoreParams`` 

> contains the parameters for individual cores. They must be implemented as case classes with fields that can be overridden by 

Reviewer: This could use some clarifications (or maybe examples)

Author: I misunderstood ``TileParams`` and ``CoreParams``. I changed the wording and it should be good now.

other config fragments as the constructor parameters. See the appendix at the bottom of the page for a list of 
variable to be implemented. You can also add custom fields to them, but standard fields should always be preferred. 

``InstantiableTileParams[TileType]`` holds the constructor of ``TileType`` on top of the fields of ``TileParams``.
All custom cores will also need to implement ``instantiate()`` in their tile parameter class to return a new instance

> of the tile class ``TileType``. 

Reviewer: TileType hasn't been mentioned up to this point. What is it?

Author: It's the tile class. Added an explanation for it.

``TileParams``, ``InstantiableTileParams[TileType]`` and ``CoreParams`` contains the following fields (you may ignore 

> any fields marked "Rocket specific" and use their default values, although it is recommended to use them if you 

Reviewer: Does this mean that any field marked as "Rocket specific" does not need to be implemented by a custom core?

Author: Yes, and I mentioned above the code section. I moved that note down here in this revision to make it easier to understand.

      // Rocket specific: Longest possible latency of Rocket core D1 cache. Simply set it to the default value 80 if you don't use it.
      def lrscCycles: Int

      def dcacheReqTagBits: Int = 6

      def minFLen: Int = 32
      def vLen: Int = 0
      def sLen: Int = 0
      def eLen(xLen: Int, fLen: Int): Int = xLen max fLen
      def vMemDataBits: Int = 0
    }

    case class FPUParams(
      minFLen: Int = 32,          // Minimum floating point length (no need to change) 
      fLen: Int = 64,             // Maximum floating point length, use 32 if only single precision is supported
      divSqrt: Boolean = true,    // Div/Sqrt operation supported
      sfmaLatency: Int = 3,       // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (single precision)
      dfmaLatency: Int = 4        // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (double precision)
    )

Most of the fields here are originally designed for the Rocket core and thus contain some implementation-specific details, but 
many of them are general enough to be useful for other cores. It is strongly recommended to use these fields instead
of creating your own custom fields when applicable. 

> You will also need a ``CanAttachTile`` class to add the tile config into the config system, with the following format:

Reviewer: What is "CanAttachTile" going to be used for?

Author: Chipyard will instantiate a tile for every ``CanAttachTile`` found under ``TilesLocated(InSubsystem)``.

Author: Explanation added.

    you should document them if you use them.

Create Tile Class
-----------------

In Chipyard, all Tiles are diplomatically instantiated. In the first phase, diplomatic nodes which specify Tile-to-System
interconnects are evaluated, while in the second "Module Implementation" phase, hardware is elaborated. 
See :ref:`tilelink_and_diplomacy` for more details. In this step, you will need to implement a tile class for your core,
which specifies the constraints on the core's parameters and the connections with other diplomatic nodes. This class
usually contains Diplomacy/TileLink code only, and Chisel RTL code should not go here.

All tile classes implement ``BaseTile`` and will normally implement ``SinksExternalInterrupts`` and ``SourcesExternalNotifications``,
which allow the tile to accept external interrupt. A typical tile has the following form:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: Tile class
    :end-before: DOC include end: Tile class

Connect TileLink Buses
----------------------

> Chipyard use TileLink as its onboard bus protocol. If your core doesn't use TileLink, you will need to insert converters 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chipyard uses TileLink as its onboard bus protocol. If your core doesn't use TileLink, you will need to insert converters 
```

Author: Done

> between the core's memory protocol and TileLink in the Tile module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between the core's memory protocol and TileLink within the Tile module.
```

Author: Done.

``memAXI4Node`` is an AXI4 master node and is defined as following in our example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: AXI4 node
    :end-before: DOC include end: AXI4 node

where ``portName`` and ``idBits`` (number of bits to represent a port ID) are the parameter provides by the tile.
Make sure to read :ref:`node_types` to check out what type of nodes Chipyard supports and their parameters!

Also, by default, there are boundary buffers for both master and slave connections to the bus when they are leaving the tile, and you
can override the following two functions to control how to buffer the bus requests/responses:

.. code-block:: scala

    protected def makeMasterBoundaryBuffers(implicit p: Parameters): TLBuffer
    protected def makeSlaveBoundaryBuffers(implicit p: Parameters): TLBuffer

You can find more information on ``TLBuffer`` in :ref:`diplomatic_widgets`.

Create Implementation Class
---------------------------

The implementation class contains the parameterized, actual hardware that depends on the values resolved by the Diplomacy

> framework according to the info provided in the Tile class. This class will normally contains Chisel RTL codes, and if your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
framework according to the info provided in the Tile class. This class will normally contains Chisel RTL code, and if your
```

Author: Done

> core is in Verilog, you will need to put the black box class you created in the first step here and connect it with the buses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
core is in Verilog, you will need to instantiate the black box class that wraps your Verilog implementation and connect it with the buses
```

Author: Done

and other components. No Diplomacy/TileLink code should be in this class; you should only connect the IO signals in TileLink
interfaces or other diplomatically defined components, which are located in the tile class. 

The implementation class for your core is of the following form:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: Implementation class
    :end-before: DOC include end: Implementation class

> If you create an AXI4 node (or equivalents), you will need to connect them to your core. You can connect a port like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you create an AXI4 node (or other memory bus nodes), you will need to connect them to your core implementation. You can connect a port like this:
```

Author: Done

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: AXI4 connect
    :end-before: DOC include end: AXI4 connect

Connect Interrupt
-----------------

Chipyard allows a tile to either receive interrupts from other devices or initiate interrupts to notify other cores/devices. 
In the tile that inherited ``SinksExternalInterrupts``, one can create a ``TileInterrupts`` object (a Chisel bundle) and 
call ``decodeCoreInterrupts`` with the object as the argument. Note that you should call this function in the implementation

> class since it returns a Chisel bundle used by RTL code. You can then read the interrupt bits from the object.

Reviewer: So for people with Verilog cores, they need call this functions within the Chisel TileImp wrapper, and then connect the resulting bits to their blackbox interface?

Author: Yes. I clarified it a bit.

The definition of ``TileInterrupts`` is 

.. code-block:: scala

    class TileInterrupts(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
      val debug = Bool() // debug interrupt
      val mtip = Bool() // Machine level timer interrupt
      val msip = Bool() // Machine level software interrupt
      val meip = Bool() // Machine level external interrupt 
      val seip = usingSupervisor.option(Bool()) // Valid only if supervisor mode is supported
      val lip = Vec(coreParams.nLocalInterrupts, Bool())  // Local interrupts

>     }

Reviewer: Instead of having Rocketchip code that is likely to change, can we just put a reference to the relevant file in the Rocketchip repo?

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, our ReadTheDocs system does not yet initialize submodules in the repo (its supported, but someone needs to figure out how to make it work). A HTML link is the best you can do for now.

Reviewer: HTML would be fine with me

Author: I would add some HTML links along with the code with my comments.

Reviewer 2: Are you going to replace this inlined code with links?

Author: No. I am planning to add it beside the code since the original code does not have the comments. See my comment below.

Also, the tile can also notify other cores or devices for some events by calling following functions in ``SourcesExternalNotifications``
from the implementation class:

.. code-block:: scala

    def reportHalt(could_halt: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when there is an unrecoverable hardware error (halt the machine)
    def reportHalt(errors: Seq[CanHaveErrors]) // Varient for standard error bundle (used only by cache when there's an ECC error)
    reportCease(could_cease: Option[Bool], quiescenceCycles: Int = 8) // Triggered when the core stop retiring instructions (like clock gating)
    reportWFI(could_wfi: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when a WFI instruction is executed

Create Config Fragments to Integrate the Core
---------------------------------------------

> To use your core in a Chipyard config, you would need a config fragment that would create a ``TileParams`` object of your core in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use your core in a Chipyard config, you will need a config fragment that would create a ``TileParams`` object of your core in
```

Author: Done

the current config. An example of such config will be like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: Config fragment
    :end-before: DOC include end: Config fragment

Chipyard looks up the tile parameters in the field ``TilesLocated(InSubsystem)``, whose type is a list of ``InstantiableTileParams``.
This config fragment simply appends new tile parameters to the end of this list. 

Now you have finished all the steps to prepare your cores for Chipyard! To generate the custom core, simply follow the instructions
in :ref:`custom_chisel` to add your project to the build system, then create a config by following the steps in :ref:`hetero_socs_`.

> You can now run any desired workflow for the new config just as you do for the built-in cores. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now run most desired workflows for the new config just as you would for the built-in cores (depending on the functionality your core supports). 
```

interfaces or other diplomatically defined components, which are located in the tile class. 

The implementation class for your core is of the following form:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: Implementation class
    :end-before: DOC include end: Implementation class

If you create an AXI4 node (or equivalents), you will need to connect them to your core. You can connect a port like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: AXI4 connect
    :end-before: DOC include end: AXI4 connect

Connect Interrupt
-----------------

Chipyard allows a tile to either receive interrupts from other devices or initiate interrupts to notify other cores/devices. 
In the tile that inherited ``SinksExternalInterrupts``, one can create a ``TileInterrupts`` object (a Chisel bundle) and 
call ``decodeCoreInterrupts`` with the object as the argument. Note that you should call this function in the implementation

> class since it returns a Chisel bundle used by RTL code. You can then read the interrupt bits from the resulting object.

Reviewer: What is the resulting object? is that not the original TileInterrupts bundle you created?
Can you give an example code sequence, assuming I had some chisel blackbox with an `int_in` port? (this should be 3 lines)

Author: It's actually the ``TileInterrupts`` created in last step, and I clarified this by pointing this out in the docs. I also added some code to demonstrate how to connect interrupts and raise interrupts.

This object is derived from``TileParams``, a trait containing the information needed to create a tile. All cores must have
their own implementation of ``InstantiableTileParams``, as well as ``CoreParams`` which is passed as a field in ``TileParams``.

``TileParams`` holds the parameters for the tile, which include parameters for all components in the tile (e.g.
core, cache, MMU, etc.), while ``CoreParams`` contains parameters specific to the core on the tile. 
They must be implemented as case classes with fields that can be overridden by 
other config fragments as the constructor parameters. See the appendix at the bottom of the page for a list of 
variable to be implemented. You can also add custom fields to them, but standard fields should always be preferred. 

``InstantiableTileParams[TileType]`` holds the constructor of ``TileType`` on top of the fields of ``TileParams``, 
where ``TileType`` is the tile class (see the next section).
All custom cores will also need to implement ``instantiate()`` in their tile parameter class to return a new instance
of the tile class ``TileType``. 

> ``TileParams``, ``InstantiableTileParams[TileType]`` and ``CoreParams`` contains the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
` ``TileParams`` `<https://github.com/chipsalliance/rocket-chip/blob/master/src/main/scala/tile/BaseTile.scala>_, ` ``InstantiableTileParams[TileType]`` `<https://github.com/chipsalliance/rocket-chip/blob/master/src/main/scala/tile/BaseTile.scala>_ and ` ``CoreParams`` `<https://github.com/chipsalliance/rocket-chip/blob/master/src/main/scala/tile/Core.scala>_ contain the following fields:
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure I got the syntax exactly right, but this is what I meant by adding the html links. Having the links as a comment in the code example is nice, but would make more sense a a path in the repo. It is much more useful when a user can click on a link in the docs and directly see the updated code on the github web UI

Author: It seems to be not possible to keep a link in inline code format while indicating that it is a clickable link (and even making the inline code a link is very tricky). I removed the inline code format from the links here.

Author: I also added a note to remind users that there might be discrepancy between the source files in Rocket repo and the the code on the page.

The implementation class for your core is of the following form:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: Implementation class
    :end-before: DOC include end: Implementation class

If you create an AXI4 node (or equivalents), you will need to connect them to your core. You can connect a port like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: AXI4 connect
    :end-before: DOC include end: AXI4 connect

Connect Interrupt
-----------------

Chipyard allows a tile to either receive interrupts from other devices or initiate interrupts to notify other cores/devices. 
In the tile that inherited ``SinksExternalInterrupts``, one can create a ``TileInterrupts`` object (a Chisel bundle) and 
call ``decodeCoreInterrupts()`` with the object as the argument. Note that you should call this function in the implementation
class since it returns a Chisel bundle used by RTL code. You can then read the interrupt bits from the ``TileInterrupts`` bundle

> we create above. The definition of ``TileInterrupts`` is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we create above. The `definition of ``TileInterrupts`` `<https://github.com/chipsalliance/rocket-chip/blob/master/src/main/scala/tile/Interrupts.scala>_ is 
```

Reviewer: Same comment as earlier

.. code-block:: scala

    // This class can be found in https://github.com/chipsalliance/rocket-chip/blob/master/src/main/scala/tile/Interrupts.scala.
    class TileInterrupts(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
      val debug = Bool() // debug interrupt
      val mtip = Bool() // Machine level timer interrupt
      val msip = Bool() // Machine level software interrupt
      val meip = Bool() // Machine level external interrupt 
      val seip = usingSupervisor.option(Bool()) // Valid only if supervisor mode is supported
      val lip = Vec(coreParams.nLocalInterrupts, Bool())  // Local interrupts
    }

Here is an example on how to connect these signals in the implementation class:

.. literalinclude:: ../../generators/chipyard/src/main/scala/example/TutorialTile.scala
    :language: scala
    :start-after: DOC include start: connect interrupt
    :end-before: DOC include end: connect interrupt

> Also, the tile can also notify other cores or devices for some events by calling following functions in ``SourcesExternalNotifications``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, the tile can also notify other cores or devices for some events by calling `following functions`<https://github.com/chipsalliance/rocket-chip/blob/master/src/main/scala/tile/Interrupts.scala>_ in ``SourcesExternalNotifications``
```

.. _custom_core:

Adding a custom core
====================

> You may want to add a custom RISC-V core to Chipyard generator. If the top module of your core is not in Chisel, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may want to integrate a custom RISC-V core into the Chipyard framework. If the top module of your core is not in Chisel, 
```

Author: Done.

you will first need to create a Verilog blackbox for it. See :ref:`incorporating-verilog-blocks` for instructions.

> Once you have a top module in Chisel, you are ready to create integrate it with Chipyard. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done.

> ``generators/ariane/src/main/scala/ArianeTile.scala`` and ``generators/boom/src/main/scala/common/tile.scala`` 

Reviewer: This seems a bit out-of-the-blue. I would have expected an explanation about the Tile interface and parameters before linking the the examples. I think it's worth pointing to these examples at the end of the explanation

Author: I moved this to the bottom as a note that people can look at ArianeTile if they would like a concrete example. I removed BoomTile since it is not really third-party but something designed around the Rocket Chip generator, and it is too complicated as an example.

provide two examples of how to integrate a core.

.. note:: 

>     RoCC is not supported by custom core currently. Please use Rocket or Boom as the RoCC base core if you need to use RoCC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    RoCC is currently not supported by cores other than Rocket and BOOM. Please use Rocket or BOOM as the RoCC base core if you need to use RoCC.
```

Parameter Case Classes
----------------------

> Chipyard will generate a core for every ``InstantiableTileParams`` object it discovered in the current config.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Chipyard will generate a core for every ``InstantiableTileParams`` object it discovered in the ``TilesLocated(InSubsystem)`` key.
```

This object is derived from``TileParams``, a trait containing the information needed to create a tile. All cores must have
their own implementation of ``InstantiableTileParams``, as well as ``CoreParams`` which is passed as a field in ``TileParams``.

> ``TileParams`` holds the parameters for the tile, which are the same for every generated core, while ``CoreParams`` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``TileParams`` holds the parameters for the tile, while ``CoreParams`` 
```

contains the parameters for individual cores. They must be implemented as case classes with fields that can be overridden by 

> other config fragments as the constructor parameters. See the appendix at the bottom of the page for a list of 

Reviewer: Can you put a markdown reference label and link there?

Author: Jerry suggest that I should remove the appendix and add it later (until we know what to list there), so I think I am just removing the last sentence.

Reviewer: sure

.. code-block:: scala

    trait TileParams {
      val core: CoreParams                  // Core parameters (see below)
      val icache: Option[ICacheParams]      // Rocket specific: I1 cache option
      val dcache: Option[DCacheParams]      // Rocket specific: D1 cache option
      val btb: Option[BTBParams]            // Rocket specific: BTB / branch predictor option
      val hartId: Int                       // Hart ID: Must be unique within a design config
      val beuAddr: Option[BigInt]           // Rocket specific: Bus Error Unit for Rocket Core
      val blockerCtrlAddr: Option[BigInt]   // Rocket specific: Bus Blocker for Rocket Core
      val name: Option[String]              // Name of the core
    }

    abstract class InstantiableTileParams[TileType <: BaseTile] extends TileParams {
      def instantiate(crossing: TileCrossingParamsLike, lookup: LookupByHartIdImpl)
                    (implicit p: Parameters): TileType
    }

    trait CoreParams {
      val bootFreqHz: BigInt              // Frequency
      val useVM: Boolean                  // Support virtual memory
      val useUser: Boolean                // Support user mode

>       val useSupervisor: Boolean          // Support supervisor mode

Reviewer: Ideally this would be an `include` statement so the code doesn't turn stale

Author: Done. Used an example file to hold them.

      // Normally, you don't need to change these values (except lrscCycles) 
      def customCSRs(implicit p: Parameters): CustomCSRs = new CustomCSRs

      def hasSupervisorMode: Boolean = useSupervisor || useVM
      def instBytes: Int = instBits / 8
      def fetchBytes: Int = fetchWidth * instBytes
      // Rocket specific: Longest possible latency of Rocket core D1 cache. Simply set it to the default value 80 if you don't use it.
      def lrscCycles: Int

      def dcacheReqTagBits: Int = 6

      def minFLen: Int = 32
      def vLen: Int = 0
      def sLen: Int = 0
      def eLen(xLen: Int, fLen: Int): Int = xLen max fLen
      def vMemDataBits: Int = 0
    }

    case class FPUParams(
      minFLen: Int = 32,          // Minimum floating point length (no need to change) 
      fLen: Int = 64,             // Maximum floating point length, use 32 if only single precision is supported
      divSqrt: Boolean = true,    // Div/Sqrt operation supported
      sfmaLatency: Int = 3,       // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (single precision)
      dfmaLatency: Int = 4        // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (double precision)
    )

> Most of the fields here are originally designed for Rocket core and contains some architecture-specific details, but 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the fields here are originally designed for the Rocket core and thus contain some implementation-specific details, but 
```

many of them are general enough to be useful for other cores. It is strongly recommended to use these fields instead
of creating your own custom fields when applicable. 

.. note::

    Implementations may choose to ignore some fields here or use them in a non-standard way, but using an inaccurate

>     value may break Chipyard components that rely on them (e.g. inaccurate indication of supported ISA extension will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    value may break Chipyard components that rely on them (e.g. an inaccurate indication of supported ISA extension will
```

>     result in incorrect test suite being generated) as well as any custom module that use them. ALWAYS document any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    result in an incorrect test suite being generated) as well as any custom modules that use them. ALWAYS document any
```

        this(params, crossing.crossingType, lookup, p, logicalTreeNode)

      // Require TileLink nodes
      val intOutwardNode = IntIdentityNode()
      val masterNode = visibilityNode
      val slaveNode = TLIdentityNode()

      // Implementation class (See below)
      override lazy val module = new MyTileModuleImp(this)

      // Required entry of CPU device in the device tree for interrupt purpose
      val cpuDevice: SimpleDevice = new SimpleDevice("cpu", Seq("my-organization,my-cpu", "riscv")) {
        override def parent = Some(ResourceAnchors.cpus)
        override def describe(resources: ResourceBindings): Description = {
          val Description(name, mapping) = super.describe(resources)
          Description(name, mapping ++
                            cpuProperties ++
                            nextLevelCacheProperty ++
                            tileProperties)
        }
      }

      ResourceBinding {
        Resource(cpuDevice, "reg").bind(ResourceAddress(hartId))
      }

      // (Connection to bus, interrupt, etc.)
    }

TileLink Connection
-------------------

> Chipyard use TileLink as its onboard bus protocol, and if your core doesn't use TileLink, you will need to convert them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Chipyard use TileLink as its onboard bus protocol. If your core doesn't use TileLink, you will need to insert converters between the core's memory protocol and TileLike in the Tile module.
```

in the tile class. Below is an example of how to connect a core using AXI4 to the TileLink bus with converters provided by

> Chipyards: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rocketchip: 
```

.. code-block:: scala

    val memoryTap = TLIdentityNode() // Every bus connection should have their own tap node
    (tlMasterXbar.node  // tlMasterXbar is the bus crossbar to be used when this core / tile is acting as a master; otherwise, use tlSlaveXBar
      := memoryTap
      := TLBuffer()
      := TLFIFOFixer(TLFIFOFixer.all) // fix FIFO ordering
      := TLWidthWidget(beatBytes) // reduce size of TL
      := AXI4ToTL() // convert to TL
      := AXI4UserYanker(Some(2)) // remove user field on AXI interface. need but in reality user intf. not needed
      := AXI4Fragmenter() // deal with multi-beat xacts
      := memAXI4Node) // The custom node, see below

Remember, you may not need all of these intermediate widgets. See :ref:`diplomatic_widgets` for the meaning of each intermediate
widget. If you are using TileLink, then you only need the tap node and the TileLink node used by your components. Chipyard also
provides converters for AHB, APB and AXIS, and most of the AXI4 widgets has equivalent widget for these bus protocol; see the 
source files in ``generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba`` for more info. 

> If you are using other bus protocol, you may implement your own converters, using the files in ``generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using some other bus protocol, you may implement your own converters, using the files in ``generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba``
```

Also, the tile can also notify other cores or devices for some events by calling following functions in ``SourcesExternalNotifications``
from the implementation class:

.. code-block:: scala

    def reportHalt(could_halt: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when there is an unrecoverable hardware error (halt the machine)
    def reportHalt(errors: Seq[CanHaveErrors]) // Varient for standard error bundle (used only by cache when there's an ECC error)
    reportCease(could_cease: Option[Bool], quiescenceCycles: Int = 8) // Triggered when the core stop retiring instructions (like clock gating)
    reportWFI(could_wfi: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when a WFI instruction is executed

Implementation Class
--------------------

The implementation class is of the following form:

.. code-block:: scala

    class MyTileModuleImp(outer: MyTile) extends BaseTileModuleImp(outer){
      // annotate the parameters
      Annotated.params(this, outer.tileParams)

      // TODO: Create the top module of the core and connect it with the ports in "outer"
    }

In the body of this class, you can look up any parameters by calling ``p({key})``, where ``{key}`` is the config key of 

> the value you want to look up. For a list of available keys, see the appendix below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the value you want to look up. For a list of frequently useful keys, see the appendix below.
```

If you create an AXI4 node (or equivalents), you will need to connect them to your core. You can connect a port like this:

.. code-block:: scala

    outer.myAXI4Node.out foreach { case (out, edgeOut) =>
      // Connect your module IO port to "out"
      // The type of "out" here is AXI4Bundle, which is defined in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/axi4/Bundles.scala
      // Please refer to this file for the definition of the ports.
      // If you are using APB, check APBBundle in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/apb/Bundles.scala
      // If you are using AHB, check AHBSlaveBundle or AHBMasterBundle in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/ahb/Bundles.scala
      // (choose one depends on the type of AHB node you create)
      // If you are using AXIS, check AXISBundle and AXISBundleBits in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/axis/Bundles.scala
    }

Integrate the Core
------------------

> To use your core in a set of config, you would need a config fragment that would create a ``TileParams`` object of your core in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use your core in a Chipyard config, you would need a config fragment that would create a ``TileParams`` object of your core in
```

.. _custom_core:

Adding a custom core
====================

You may want to add a custom RISC-V core to Chipyard generator. If the top module of your core is not in Chisel, 
you will first need to create a Verilog blackbox for it. See :ref:`incorporating-verilog-blocks` for instructions.
Once you have a top module in Chisel, you are ready to create integrate it with Chipyard. 

.. note:: 

    RoCC is not supported by custom core currently. Please use Rocket or Boom if you need to use RoCC.

Parameter Case Classes
----------------------

> Chipyard will generate a core for every ``TileParams`` object it discovered in the current config.

Reviewer 2: I would like more details here on the TilesLocated field, which is the actual data structure that drives Tile elaboration

Author: Done.

``TileParams`` is a trait containing the information needed to create a tile, and every custom core must implement

> their own version of ``TileParams``, as well as ``CoreParams`` which is passed as a field in ``TileParams``.

Reviewer 2: > must provide their own implementation

instead of 

> must implement their their own version

Author: Done.

``TileParams`` holds the parameters that are the same for every generated core, while ``CoreParams`` contains those

> that can vary from cores to cores. They must be implemented as case classes with fields that can be overridden by 

Reviewer 2: I would rephrase this. TileParams holds parameters that are relevant for the Tile, while CoreParams holds parameters that are relevant for the core.

Author: Done.

other config fragments as the constructor parameters. See the appendix at the bottom of the page for a list of 
variable to be implemented. You can also add custom fields to them, but standard fields should always be preferred. 

Now you have your parameter classes, you will need config keys to hold them. There are two required keys:

.. code-block:: scala

    case object MyTilesKey extends Field[Seq[MyTileParams]](Nil)
    case object MyCrossingKey extends Field[Seq[RocketCrossingParams]](List(RocketCrossingParams())) 

> 

Reviewer 2: The new scheme for integrating tiles does not require adding custom Tile-keys and Crossing-keys for each tile type. Instead the custom configs directly add the TileAttachParams to the TilesLocated field.

Author: Done. I forgot to update the example code with the new config but should be good now.

``MyCrossingKey`` here is used to store information about the clock-crossing behavior of the core, and it is normally
set to its default values. 

``TileParams`` and ``CoreParams`` contains the following fields (you may ignore any fields marked "Rocket specific" and 
use their default values, although it is recommended to use them if you need a custom field with similar purposes) :

> 

Reviewer 2: This would be a good place to link to the places in BOOM and Ariane which demonstrate how this is used.
In the future, Sodor as well.

Author: I added the path to the files at the beginning of the page so that people can follow them when reading this page. Should I use a github link?

Reviewer 2: This is fine

      def instBytes: Int = instBits / 8
      def fetchBytes: Int = fetchWidth * instBytes
      // Rocket specific: Longest possible latency of Rocket core D1 cache. Simply set it to the default value 80.
      def lrscCycles: Int

      def dcacheReqTagBits: Int = 6

      def minFLen: Int = 32
      def vLen: Int = 0
      def sLen: Int = 0
      def eLen(xLen: Int, fLen: Int): Int = xLen max fLen
      def vMemDataBits: Int = 0
    }

    case class FPUParams(
      minFLen: Int = 32,          // Minimum floating point length (no need to change) 
      fLen: Int = 64,             // Maximum floating point length, use 32 if only single precision is supported
      divSqrt: Boolean = true,    // Div/Sqrt operation supported
      sfmaLatency: Int = 3,       // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (single precision)
      dfmaLatency: Int = 4        // Rocket specific: Fused multiply-add pipeline latency (double precision)
    )

Most of the fields here are originally designed for Rocket core and contains some architecture-specific details, but 
many of them are general enough to be useful for other cores. It is strongly recommended to use these fields instead

> of creating your own custom fields when applicable.

Reviewer 2: I would add a stronger note here that implementations may always ignore values in fields set here, or use them in non-standard ways.

Author: Done, but I would need someone to take another look here.

Reviewer 2: The new text looks fine

Tile Class
----------

In Chipyard, all connections with other components on SoC are defined a core's `Tile` class, while the implementation 
of the actual hardware are in the implementation class. This structure allows Chipyard to use the Diplomacy framework

> to resolve paramters and connections before elaboration. 

Reviewer 2: You should mention diplomacy first
> In Chipyard, all Tiles are diplomatically instantiated. In the first phase, diplomatic nodes which specify Tile-to-System interconnects are evaluated, while in the second "Module Implementation" phase, hardware is elaborated. See (link to diplomacy) for more details

Author: Done. I pasted your quote there.

    }

TileLink Connection
-------------------

Chipyard use TileLink as its onboard bus protocol, and if your core doesn't use TileLink, you will need to convert them
in the tile class. Below is an example of how to connect a core using AXI4 to the TileLink bus: 

.. code-block:: scala

    val memoryTap = TLIdentityNode() // Every bus connection should have their own tap node
    (tlMasterXbar.node  // tlMasterXbar is the bus crossbar to be used when this core / tile is acting as a master; otherwise, use tlSlaveXBar
      := memoryTap
      := TLBuffer()
      := TLFIFOFixer(TLFIFOFixer.all) // fix FIFO ordering
      := TLWidthWidget(beatBytes) // reduce size of TL
      := AXI4ToTL() // convert to TL
      := AXI4UserYanker(Some(2)) // remove user field on AXI interface. need but in reality user intf. not needed
      := AXI4Fragmenter() // deal with multi-beat xacts
      := memAXI4Node) // The custom node, see below

Remember, you may not need all of these intermediate widgets. See :ref:`diplomatic_widgets` for the meaning of each intermediate
widget. If you are using TileLink, then you only need the tap node and the TileLink node used by your components. Also, Chipyard

> support AHB, APB and AXIS, and most of the AXI4 widgets has equivalent widget for these bus protocol. See the reference page for

Reviewer 2: I would be more precise here, and say that RocketChip provides converters between various protocols and TileLink

Author: Done.

Interrupt
---------

Chipyard allows a tile to either receive interrupts from other devices or initiate interrupts to notify other cores/devices. 
In the tile that inherited ``SinksExternalInterrupts``, one can create a ``TileInterrupts`` object (a Chisel bundle) and 
call ``decodeCoreInterrupts`` with the object as the argument. You can then read the interrupt bits from the object.
The definition of ``TileInterrupts`` is 

.. code-block:: scala

    class TileInterrupts(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
      val debug = Bool() // debug interrupt
      val mtip = Bool() // Machine level timer interrupt
      val msip = Bool() // Machine level software interrupt
      val meip = Bool() // Machine level external interrupt 
      val seip = usingSupervisor.option(Bool()) // Valid only if supervisor mode is supported
      val lip = Vec(coreParams.nLocalInterrupts, Bool())  // Local interrupts
    }

This function should be in the implementation class since it involves hardware generation. 
Also, the tile can also notify other cores or devices for some events by calling following functions (in implementation class):

> 

Reviewer 2: Mention this is part of the SourcesExternalNotifications trait

Author: Done.

.. code-block:: scala

    def reportHalt(could_halt: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when there is an unrecoverable hardware error (halt the machine)
    def reportHalt(errors: Seq[CanHaveErrors]) // Varient for standard error bundle (used only by cache when there's an ECC error)
    reportCease(could_cease: Option[Bool], quiescenceCycles: Int = 8) // Triggered when the core stop retiring instructions (like clock gating)
    reportWFI(could_wfi: Option[Bool]) // Triggered when a WFI instruction is executed

Trace (Optional)
----------------

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we should leave this section out for now. We actually use a nonstandard trace format for debugging, since its easier to use than the official Trace spec.

Author: Done. I just removed this part.

If you create an AXI4 node (or equivalents), you will need to connect them to your core. You can connect a port like this:

.. code-block:: scala

    outer.myAXI4Node.out foreach { case (out, edgeOut) =>
      // Connect your module IO port to "out"
      // The type of "out" here is AXI4Bundle, which is defined in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/axi4/Bundles.scala
      // Please refer to this file for the definition of the ports.
      // If you are using APB, check APBBundle in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/apb/Bundles.scala
      // If you are using AHB, check AHBSlaveBundle or AHBMasterBundle in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/ahb/Bundles.scala
      // (choose one depends on the type of AHB node you create)
      // If you are using AXIS, check AXISBundle and AXISBundleBits in generators/rocket-chip/src/main/scala/amba/axis/Bundles.scala
    }

Integrate the Core
------------------

To use your core in a set of config, you would need a config fragment that would create a ``TileParams`` object of your core in
the current config. An example of such config will be like this:

.. code-block:: scala

>     class WithNMyCores(n: Int) extends Config((site, here, up) => {

Reviewer 2: This should have the `hartidOffset` field.

Author: Done.

      case MyTilesKey => {
        List.tabulate(n)(i => MyTileParams(hartId = i))
      }
    })

Now you have finished all the steps to prepare your cores for Chipyard! To generate the custom core, simply follow the instructions
in :ref:`custom_chisel` to add your project to the build system, then create a config by following the steps in :ref:`hetero_socs_`.
You can now run any desired workflow for the new config just as you do for the built-in cores. 

Appendix: Common Config Keys
----------------------------

> 

Reviewer 2: The below seems unrelated to "Third-party core integration", as most of the below fields are related to configuring uncore components.

Author: I saw Ariane used some of the keys here when it connected its ports to the memory. I think other cores may also have the needs to access those parameters. Maybe I should move them to their own page?

Reviewer 2: You can just not include these for now, we can look at those later.
